## Purpose

I was looking for data on outpatient medical services in the U.S. and found that the CDC's [National Center for Health Statistics NCHS](https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/ahcd/index.htm) holds a tight grip on this data. It's pretty much inaccessible to someone like me, without access to SAS or STATA. I then looked for data at the DHHS's [Health Care Cost and Utilization Project HCUP](https://hcupnet.ahrq.gov/#setup), which provides actual data collected at hospitals and clinics.  But that data is also tightly guarded, although there is [HCUP Net](https://hcupnet.ahrq.gov/). I thought I would familiarize myself with diagnoses in order to download pertinent data, but instead got sidetracked but the metadata of the metadata. The **metadata file on diagnoses is 73,371** lines long, and the metadata to the metadata is a 66 page file!!. Easily navigating and searching the diagnoses became a project in itslef.

Thanks to the metadata of the metadata I was able to understand the system of classifying diagnoses. In this Shiny app you'll find the Clinical Classifications Software Refined (CCSR)'s "21 body systems" labeled as **"Chapters,"** and their corresponding "530 clinical categories" labeled as **"Categories."** The International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-10-CM) diagnoses are labeled as **"Diagnoses."** This grouping is the great achievement of the CCSR!!

## Lessons

The first big challenge was cleaning the list of of diagnoses that came in a hard-to-manipulate CSV file. I learned how to do a 18 to 3 long pivot. 

Once I got it cleaned, it was smooth sailing until I got to creating the search for diagnoses. I first tried to search for diagnoses that contained all search terms, for which I used `(?=*term)(?=*term2)` ... `(?=*termN)`. No matter the function I used, `regex`, `str_detect`, `stri_detect`, the matching process was extraordinarily slow. True, I was searching 73,000 entries with a few sentences each. I turned to [StackOverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/72334928/r-fast-way-to-find-all-vector-elements-that-contain-all-search-terms) for help and [@onyamby](https://stackoverflow.com/users/8380272/onyambu) provided an amazingly fast single line of code. It is surprisingly easy when you think about it, instead of looping through each description string and matching all search terms with a regular expression, loop through each term separately and then get the overlapping `TRUE` results. You can see the discussion [here](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/72334928/r-fast-way-to-find-all-vector-elements-that-contain-all-search-terms).

The next challenge was trying to update a dependant table upon a click on a row using the [DT package](https://rstudio.github.io/DT/). But DT doesn't make available full table information as `inputs` ready to be used by Shiny. For instance, if a user clicks on cell (2,3), you can't know through DT what the value is for anoher cell in the same row, say cell (2,4). To solve this problem I had to store an "active" vector of IDs that I could refence to make my updates. I think this is a waste of resources, but I made the best of it, instead of storing the whole "active" data frame, I stored only an "index" vector.

Now I can go back and get the real data I want! Anyone knows how to hack the HCUP interface to get raw data? I don't want summary tables, I want to make my own analysis!